---
draft: false
---

This is the story of how I transitioned to VIM in the hope that it helps you transition to VIM too. 
When I first started coding I used good ol' Sublime text. Then in 2018, I moved to good ol' Visual Studio Code and never looked back. I actually looked forward. Forward to VIM which has many benefits though I won't list them here to save us both time.

The problem was that the transition to VIM was a big step...and big first steps are always hard. I started by enabling VIM mode in VSC. I watched tutorials and learned the basics through `vimtutor` and then forced myself to continue writing code using VIM mode in VSC. I'm not going to lie...it was hard in the beginning. Fighting the urge to go back to the ol' ways of navigating code was a recurring thing. I remember getting fat fingers during a meeting while showing some code to a supervisor. My cursor was going everywhere but where I wanted it to go. The pressure was exaggerating the learning curve. Eventually you get used to the movements and you form the muscle memory. You feel less and less friction over time until you come to the realisation that it's time to move to VIM, the application. 

That's when I decided to use Neovim but I didn't know where to start and which config to use. There were so many options. After browsing a few Reddit posts and talking to a friend who used Neovim I ended up picking LazyVim. I think of myself as lazy. Others may call it efficient. Maybe that's why I chose LazyVim. Regardless, it was nice. I was surprised at how well the application mimicked an IDE like VSC. You could browse files, create panes for terminal usage, see debug output, etc. It was nice. For a while. There were so many plugins and I didn't know what each plugin did. It took too much time going through each plugin, learning what it does, how it works, and how to configure it.

So, I decided to do what probably every NeoVim user has done numerous times. I redid my config. I removed everything related to LazyVim and just created a single config file. I only added the plugins that I understood and wanted to use. One of the first ones I added was Oil. Oil lets you treat your filesystem as if it were a vim buffer. As if your list of files was the content of a text file which lets you copy paste lines (files), delete them, and the other useful file system stuff like navigation and renaming. 

That was also the time when I discovered Language Server Protocols (LSPs) which blew my mind. I love finding out how things work and looking behind the scenes at things and I found out that LSPs are a big part of IDEs like VSC. Proof that using nvim indirectly teaches you about what's happening under the hood which strengthens your overall systems knowledge. I installed a plugin called `mason.nvim` which made it so easy to install LSPs and highly recommend it to anyone using nvim. As I added more and more plugins that I understood and appreciated, my config file became longer and longer. At the time my config was all just a single file. It got messy. Very long and messy.

So, I decided to do what probably every NeoVim user has done numerous times. I redid my config. I split the file up into a plugins folder and put each plugin into its own single file. This meant it was a lot easier to find the plugin and reconfigure it when I had to. To this day it's remained like this and I think it's the best way to organise your Neovim plugins. 

So what have I learnt and what could you learn? Start learning vim motions by enabling vim mode in your IDE. Also try out `vimtutor`, an application that's installed with vim. Once you're familiar with the motions you can move to NeoVim. I'd recommend starting with no plugins and adding them one by one. 

Over time you'll have a custom list of plugins that are specific for you and great for you. I think that's the best part, Neovim evolves into the best tool for you. You just have to invest into it. I have, and I believe that my investment has paid off.